this video is sponsored by Nord VPN in
the world of watch enthusiasts there can
be a bit of snobbery that says
mechanical watches are far superior to
battery-powered watches and I can
understand why like you've got these
objects that are really intricate really
precise really small and yet entirely
mechanical that's amazing like that's a
really desirable object but when you
find out how the mechanism inside a
battery-powered quartz watch works it
becomes equally desirable at least it
did for me and it's probably the next
watch that I'll get once my pebble kicks
the bucket but anyway this video is
about the amazing mechanism that powers
a quartz watch if you want to make any
kind of timekeeping device then the
first thing you need is some kind of
thing that oscillates where you know how
long each oscillation takes so a good
example is a grandfather clock so you
have a pendulum where it is known that a
single pendulum swing takes one second
you know the period of oscillation and
you can use it to drive the mechanism of
the clock but if you tried to wear a
pension clock on your wrist it wouldn't
work
because the movement of your hand would
cause the pendulum to go all over the
place you have the same problem if you
put a grandfather clock on a
actually it was the need to be able to
tell the time at C that drove the
development of non pendulum based clocks
that ultimately led to mechanical
wristwatches in a conical clock the
pendulum is replaced with an oscillating
mass on a spring a bit like this except
that this arrangement isn't much better
than the pendulum it still relies on
gravity and it's going to swing around
on a ship so instead you use a coiled
spring and a rotating mass the rotating
mass repeatedly winds up and unwinds the
coiled spring like this that balance
wheel mechanism is the basis of most
mechanical watches and it could be
incredibly accurate a high-end
mechanical
might only lose as many as five seconds
per day and yet a battery-powered watch
can easily be way more accurate than
that and they can achieve that feat with
a tiny tuning fork so grandfather clock
uses a pendulum with a known period of
oscillation and mechanical what she uses
a mass on a spring with a known period
of oscillation and a battery-powered
watch uses a tuning fork with a known
period of oscillation this particular
tuning fork oscillates 440 times per
second which is an audible frequency
otherwise known as a above middle C it
is you may already have spotted a
problem with using a tuning fork to keep
time which is that well you whack it to
get it to vibrate but then the vibration
slowly dies down until it's not
vibrating anymore so how do you keep it
vibrating and also how do you turn that
vibration into the ticking of a clock
actually both of those problems can be
solved with an electromagnet consider
this simplified tuning fork I don't know
if you can call it tuning for it I mean
it's a metal ruler and a vise but anyway
like a tuning fork if you whack it it
will vibrate at its natural resonating
frequency unlike a tuning foot you can't
hear it because the frequencies too low
but like a tuning fork if you leave it
for long enough eventually the
vibrations will die down to nothing
eventually
beldam Isabella but now look at this
setup I've got an electromagnet here
these are the wires going into the
electromagnet this one's connected to a
nine volt power supply but this one's
just not connected to anything so the
circuits broken the electromagnet has no
power but the other end of the power
supply goes into the ruler so if I were
to touch this wire against the ruler the
circuit would be complete and the
electromagnet would turn on I've also
attached a permanent magnet to the ruler
that is repelled by the electromagnet
when it's turned on so what you can do
is you can place the wire just next to
the ruler so that when the ruler gets
too close to the electromagnet it
completes the circuit and is repelled
from the electromagnet it's a bit like
pushing someone on a swing every time
they get too close to you you push them
away you're not changing the resonating
frequency of the person on the swing
you're just keeping it going miss you
better do that here
as a bonus the current in this circuit
that keeps turning on and off at regular
intervals can also be used to regulate
the ticking of the clock a more
sophisticated and miniaturized version
of this setup can actually be found in
watches manufactured between about 1940
and 1960 the Accutron had a tuning fork
inside that would vibrate 360 times per
second so if you put the watch against
your ear you would hear this sound which
is nice the real revolution came with
the discovery of piezo electricity I
explained the piezoelectric effect in my
last video and wider rises in certain
crystals the quick summary here if you
take a crystal of quartz and you cut it
in just the right way and then deform
the crystal by like hitting it for
example then your measure of voltage
across the crystal and conversely if you
apply a voltage across the crystal and
the crystal will deform so if you look
inside a digital watch or an analog
watch this battery-powered or the back
of a battery-powered war clock you will
find this component and if you take off
the protective outer case there it is
a crystal of quartz of course in the
shape of a tuning fork if I flick this
crystal it will sing like a tuning fork
except that you won't be able to hear it
because the frequency is too high for
our ears but because it's piezoelectric
it doesn't just produce this inaudible
sound it also produces a detectable
oscillating voltage this is a USB
oscilloscope so what you're seeing here
is the voltage detected across the
probes and I've connected the quartz
tuning fork to the probes so the moment
there's nothing going on but look if I
flick it I see that wave pen so that's
the voltage across the probes going up
and down because the piezoelectric
crystal is flexing back and forth so the
voltage it produces is going up and down
we could take a screenshot and then try
and work out what the frequency is or we
can switch to frequency view where the
scope is actually going to show us the
frequencies so now if I flick it see
that spike that appears just put a
little dash line @ 32.7 kilohertz and
look when I flick it that's exactly
where the spike appears just like a
tuning fork the vibration is short-lived
and you need to find a way to keep it
going like we did with the electromagnet
but with a piezoelectric tuning fork you
can do something really clever you take
the voltage coming off the tuning fork
that oscillating voltage you run it
through an amplifier and then you feed
it back into the tuning fork and that's
how you keep the tuning fork vibrating
at its own natural resonating frequency
here's the quartz crystal back and sit
you in that feedback amplification
circuit and look here's that permanent
spike now @ 32.7 kilohertz that
measurement of 32.7 kilohertz is only
accurate to one decimal place and I
happen to know that the actual real
value is 32 point seven six eight
kilohertz or in other words 32,768 Hertz
the quartz crystals are calibrated in
the factory to be that exact frequency
so they add gold to the tips of the
tuning fork and then just slowly shave
little bits off until the frequency is
exactly right well if you know your
powers of two then you might have
spotted that it's 2 to the power 15 but
why is it that exact number there's
actually a clever reason for it but it's
two really clever reasons the first is
it needs to be above 20,000 Hertz
because that's about the limit of what
people can hear and you don't want an
audible whine coming from your watch so
let's make it above 20,000 Hertz and two
to the power 15 is the first power of
two that's above 20,000 but why does it
need to be a power of two this is where
it gets really clever because you can
take an oscillating signal like that and
you can pass it through
chain of flip-flops and it will turn
that 32,768 hurt signal into a 1 Hertz
signal one blip per second and you can
use that one blip per second to tick the
second hand of your clock and when I say
chain of flip-flops what I mean well a
flip-flop is just a little bit of logic
circuitry I'm not going to go into how a
flip-flop can be built out of and gates
and or gates and things like that but
just know that a flip-flop can hold a
state so you give it a signal and it
turns on and it will stay on until you
send it another signal and then it will
turn off and it will stay off until you
send it another signal so let's see what
happens when we chained fifteen of these
flip-flops together let's just look at
the first flip-flop in a chain to begin
with so remember you've got this signal
coming in from the quartz tuning fork
and that's an assign wave but this is a
digital device it's a it's a smart
flip-flop if you like so this is
expecting just on and off there'll be
some processing that takes that sine
wave from the quartz crystal and turns
it into a square wave like that so
you've either got on or off
coming into this flip-flop and the logic
inside the flip-flop is arranged so that
any signal that's coming in in the on
position the flip-flop will flip as soon
as the on signal turns off right so it's
in the in the drop of the on signal
right so here's the signal coming in and
as it drops that's when it flips like
that okay and then the the next signal
comes in and just as that signal cuts
off it flips again right and then the
the third signal comes in and it flips
the fourth signal comes in and it flips
right so that's the off position that's
the on position of the flip-flop and
you'll notice that the flip-flop flips
into the on position every second
signal coming in so like all the odd
signals come
flipped to the on position so if you
look at the frequency at which this
flip-flop turns on it's half the
frequency of the incoming signal and
here's the cover bit you take the signal
of this flip-flop and you feed it into
the next flip-flop in the chain right so
this flip-flop flips on and remember
we've arranged the logic inside this
flip-flop so it will flip or flop when
the signal coming into it turns off at
the moment it turns off so at the moment
that this turns off this one turns on
like that right then this one turns on
again and then at the moment that it
turns off this one turns off right and
just considering these two on their own
you'll notice that this one flips half
as often as this one and this one turns
on off half as often as the signal
coming in right and then you chain this
one into this one so you've got on/off
on/off and but then this one turns on
when this one turns off right and so the
whole thing happens again on off on oh
and then this one turns off at the same
time with the off signal from this one
the important thing is the frequency of
flips and flops goes down by a half each
time you progressive onto the next
flip-flop and so think about that you've
got a signal coming in which is 32,768
Hertz coming in this is on and off half
as often as that half of that is 16,000
386 that 84 so there's no reason I'm
looking over there by the way this one
is half as often again which is 8192 ons
per second if you like this is half of
that which is 4096 and and so on down
the chain these are powers of two so
you've got a signal coming in with a
frequency of 2 to the power 15 then this
has a frequency of 2 to the power of 14
this has a frequency of 2 to the power
of 13 to the power 12 2 to the power 11
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 this is 2 to the
power 1 that's the frequency of that
dude's got 1 is 2
as a frequency of two flip-flops per
second so this is 2 to the power 0 or 1
so this flips every second I've actually
got a redundant flip-flop here you don't
need 15 you need 14 that was my mistake
that's called a an off by one error
happens a lot in programming so you use
the signal from this flip-flop to power
what's called a stepper motor which is a
motor that can turn by an exact amount
every time it receives a voltage so you
can use that with a series of gears to
move the second hand of your clock and
then some other gears to move the minute
hand and the hour hand as well and of
course because you're dealing with an
electronic signal to begin with you can
avoid the mechanical world completely
and just use that signal to drive an LCD
display and that's how a quartz watch
works any halfway decent quartz watch is
only going to lose about a second a day
at the most which is way more accurate
than even a really high-end mechanical
watch but of course a quartz watch isn't
the most accurate way to keep time the
most accurate way we have now is with an
atomic clock but did you know this an
atomic clock still uses the vibration of
a quartz crystal to keep time it's just
that it also uses atoms of cesium to
tweak the vibrations of the quartz
crystal if it seems to be drifting off
so yeah even an atomic clock uses a
quartz crystal I'm not gonna explain how
an atomic clock works now because there
are plenty of videos out there
explaining that the best video
explanation that I found is on the
everything channel so I recommend you
hop over there and watch that I'll put a
link in the N screen and in the
description but I also recommend you
subscribe to that channel because lately
he's been making these like cinematic
epic videos where you also learn about
science really amazing so head over
there what's the video about atomic
clocks but also subscribe this whole
video came about because I was looking
at how computers know what time it is
and how they synchronize around the
globe using network time protocol
because I was doing a security audit and
it turns out having an accurate time
when your devices is important for
security who knew I was also looking at
VPNs as well so I decided to reach out
to Nord VPN to see if they sponsor this
video because that's the view pin that I
use now and so yeah they're sponsoring
this video
you know this VPN stands for virtual
private network but what it really means
is that all your online activity is
secure it's anonymous your IP address is
hidden everything's encrypted you know
look you've got nothing to hide right
but all that data that's spreading out
of your device is valuable and it can be
used in ways which is not necessarily
good for the user as a bonus by the way
if you ever get this message on YouTube
that says this video can't be viewed in
your country with a VPN you can make
your computer appear to be in a
different country and it's really easy
to do through Nord VPN it's one of the
things I like you can get it on your
computer but it's also for Android and
iOS devices if you go to North Vee PN
comm forward slash Steve now you'll get
75% off which is just two dollars 99
and if you use the promo code Steve when
you check out you'll get the first 30
days absolutely free so check out Nord
VPN today I hope you've enjoyed this
video if you did don't forget to hit
subscribe and I'll see you next time
[Music]